---
layout: default
title: Sensor Failures and N-version programming
license: https://github.com/DavidKendall/blinky/blob/master/LICENSE
---
## N-version Programming Simulation Exercise

This is an investigation of N-version programming using a java-based
simulation of a noisy and possibly unreliable sensor.

Download and unzip [`Simulation.zip`](assets/ra/Simulation.zip).  This
zip contains the following java classes:

1. __`SensorSim`__ - simulates a noisy sensor: the value returned by its
   method `double getRdg()` is a nominal value plus or minus a a random
   amount of noise. (The noise is simulated using probability-theoretic
   techniques – noise values are random numbers with a normal
   probability distribution with a configurable standard deviation. The
   larger this is, the noisier the simulated sensor.)

   To use the class, all you need to know about is 
   * an instance's two configurable attributes, the nominal value and
     the amount of noise (the mean and standard deviation of the normal
     probability distribution). 
   * The constructor takes as parameters an initial nominal value and
     amount of noise.
   * Method `start()` starts the simulation running in its own thread. 
   * Method `setNominal(double)` adjusts the nominal value even when the
     simulation is running.
   * Method `double getRdg()` retrieves a sensor reading (nominal val +
     noise).

   The source code is available on request for your interest, but you do
   not need to see it, and should certainly not change it – use the
   class as a “black box”. 

2. The class Simulation runs a simulated sensor with nominal value
   initially 100 and noise (standard deviation) 5, and repeatedly at 500
   millisecond intervals 
   * retrieves readings and displays them on a graph using a helper
     class, `DataDisplay`, 
   * outputs data to the console in a tabular format. By redirecting
     output to a text file you can log this output for experimental
     purposes, and analysis in a spreadsheet. 
   * random-walks the nominal sensor value up and down.

   Try it now: java Simulation. 

   You can run the simulation other other initial nominal values and
   noise values but we shall stick with 100, 5 for the investigation.

3. Simulation.java is the source file for the Simulation class. This is
   the only code you will need to read in detail or modify.

4. Class DataDisplay is a totally boring utility class that displays
   sensor readings on a graph. The blue trace is the time-series of
   sensor readings. The green line shows the current nominal value. The
   details of this class are not important: the only thing you need to
   know about is its method update(double reading, double snsNom) which
   adds a sensor reading to the graph trace and updates the sensor
   nominal value display.

5. A faulty sensor is one which sporadically gives an erroneous reading.
   FaultySensorSim is a subclass of SensorSim which does this. Two extra
   attributes need to be supplied to the constructor (besides the
   initial nominal value and the noise value) – an integer specifying
   the fault frequency, and a double which is an erroneous value
   returned by getRdg() instead of the correct (though noisy) one, when
   a fault occurs. Fault occurrence is simulated by a “Poisson” process
   (like cars passing or rain drops landing!) and the frequency
   parameter is the mean interval between faults, in milliseconds.

   Try using a FaultySensorSim instead of a SensorSim instance in the
   Simulation. Open the source file Simulation.java and find the line in
   the runSimulation method which constructs a SensorSim. 

   sensor = new SensorSim(sensorNom, sensorErr;

   Change this to -

   sensor = new FaultySensorSim(sensorNom, sensorErr, 10000, 200);

   Re-compile and run this to see the effect of a faulty sensor with a
   fault interval of 10000 milliseconds and a fault value of 200. Try
   other fault frequencies and fault values.

### Introducing the Investigation
Imagine a set-up where a sensor monitors some condition of the plant and
the plant must be shut down immediately if the reading becomes
dangerously high.

In reality, the sensor will be "noisy" like the simulated one, and the
"noise" level may well be around 2.5 -- 5% of the full-scale reading of
the sensor. In the simulation, imagine the full-scale reading is 200: so
a noisy sensor with noise = 5 is realistic.

Suppose that we have to do an emergency shut-down if the value reaches
150. A noisy sensor might exceptionally trigger a shut-down when the
nominal value is only 140 or even less, because "noise" boosts the
reading to 150. We may decide we have to live with that. Alternatively
we can create several sensors and take as our reading their average.
Theory predicts that the "noise" would cancel out to some extent, and
the noise in the average of n sensor readings is only (1/√n)th of the
noise in a single reading. Of course, it is probably uneconomic or
impractical to have a very large number of sensors.

There is another potential problem, however. Our sensor might be faulty,
and give us a high reading – a “hard-over” fault - from time to time and
this could trigger a “false-alarm” shut-down. The shut-downs are
required for safety reasons, but are expensive and we really need to
avoid false-alarms. We might again employ several sensors, of which one
might be faulty. Averaging the readings again will give some protection
from a faulty high reading but the average could still be much higher
than it should be. A better approach might be to implement a voter which
checks all the readings are within tolerance of each other and rejects
"out-liers", returning the average of the remainder.

Warm up Task
Record the output of a couple of minutes' run of the basic Simulation application as provided (ie, using a SensorSim with nominal value initially = 100 and noise = 5). Redirect the output to a text file thus: java SensorDataDisplay > log.txt. Find out the maximum discrepancy of a sensor reading from its nominal value (ie maximum noise). Opening log.txt in a spreadsheet is a good way to do this. Also, using  spreadsheet's AVERAGE and STDEV functions you can determine the mean and standard deviation of these discrepancies over the run.

Do not submit the detailed log – just very abridged listing (a few
lines) and report the number of outputs, the maximum discrepancy and the
mean and standard deviation of the sensor readings.

Do this again for the output of a couple of minutes' run of a Simulation
application in which a FaultySensorSim is substituted, as explained
above. How often are the faults occurring?

Main Task Make a copy of Simulation.java and change the code in the
runSimulation() method so that an array of SensorSim objects are
employed rather than a single one. They should all be given the same
initial nominal value and noise value and the random-walk should adjust
them all in the same way. The reading should be an average of their
readings.

Rather than hard-coding the size of this array, make it a parameter
passed in through the constructor.

Make one of the simulated sensors is a FaultySensorSim and the remainder
noisy but non-faulty  are two other (non-faulty) \texttt{SensorSim}
instances. Investigate the behaviour of this simulation with three (1+2)
sensors: how high can the nominal value go before an emergency shut-down
is triggered? Repeat with four (1 faulty + 3 non-faulty) sensors. 

Can you devise a voter function that gives better protection against
`false alarm' shut-down? 

One idea to reject any reading that deviates too far (more than twice
the noise level) from the average of the other readings, taking this as
`the' average reading. 

Investigate the ability of this voting approach to protect the system
from false emergency shut-down due to a single faulty sensor and give a
comparison with the simple averaging approach.

